# Teaching Critical Making: Digital Humanities, Coding Pedagogy, and New Media Arts Foundations

*Author*: Scott C. Richmond, Wayne State University (scr@wayne.edu)

Recently, making has become an important term in digital humanities pedagogy and practice. Obviously, the problem of making and its others (e.g., theory) is not new (it is at least as old as the distinction between *techne* and *episteme*), and how we talk about making as a digital humanities problem has tended to reflect the history of the field in English departments and libraries. What digital things we make in DH has tended to be tools for research or its dissemination; introductory digital humanities coursework often reflects this inheritance. Digital making itself *as* humanistic research is a relative newcomer. We have started to ask what it means to make digital things as a form of research.

This question looks different from different disciplinary perspectives, and new media art and artists have been asking, and answering, it for a long time, often in ways that are very different from DH's most ready-to-hand answers. In this paper, I present the results of an pedagogical experiment: using teaching methods from new media art foundations courses to teach digital making as a form of research to graduate students in the English department at Wayne State University. The course, "Media Theory/Media Practice," reflects my background as a coder, web developer, new media artist, media theorist, and scholar of experimental media art. It combines an intensive, graduate-level preparation in media theory with a careful and slow preparation in coding using Processing (p5.js), common in new media arts foundations courses.

This paper will present the design and results of the course (running Winter Semester 2016), including: relationships between the theory and practice halves of the course; approaches to teaching coding in JavaScript and p5.js; sample projects and support code; student writing and student projects; and prospects for future curriculum development, including undergraduate coursework.
